					~~Upazilas~~
	>> Brahmanbaria district is divided into nine upazilas (subdistricts) as below:
	1. Brahmanbaria Sadar Upazila
		2. Kasba Upazila
			3. Akhaura Upazila
		4. Ashuganj Upazila
	5. Bancharampur Upazila
		6. Bijoynagar Upazila
			7. Nasirnagar Upazila
		8. Nabinagar Upazila
	9. Sarail Upazila

					$$"_Economy_"$$

	Brahmanbaria is one of the fastest growing districts in the country. The major industries of Brahmanbaria District have been: agriculture, fishing, power and electricity, and natural gas. 30% of its population is below the poverty threshold. It has a labour force of 1,800,000 that are skilled in agricultural, industrial, and service sectors. As of 2010, it had an unemployment rate of 3.8%.

					^^Power and gas^^
	Brahmanbaria's Titas gas is the largest gas field of Bangladesh. It supplies natural gas to Dhaka and most other parts of the nation. Currently the government is drilling new wells.[19]

	In some other parts of Brahmanbaria, gas was found. It resulted in an abrupt fall in the price of gas.[20] Many parts of the country people are using gas in many illegal ways. Now the government is trying to solve that issue.

				       .............. Transport .............. 

	This district has the largest railway junction in the country at Akhaura. It connects to Kulaura and Chhatak with the Akhaura–Kulaura–Chhatak line, to Laksam and Chittagong with the Akhaura–Laksam–Chittagong line, and to Tongi and Bhairab with the Tongi–Bhairab–Akhaura line. There are about ten railway stations in the district. Recently the government of India shipped machines of the Palatana project from Kolkata to Agartala by using the Ashuganj river port on Meghna in Brahmanbaria district. Rail networks linking it to other parts of the country include the Parabat Express and Kalni Express. Brahmanbaria connects with the Asian Highway Network through the N2 highway and there is also the prominent N102 highway. To connect with India, government of both Bangladesh and India is building 15 km railway from Akhaura to Agartala

	Prime Minister of Bangladesh Sheikh Hasina gave the Government of India permission to use the Port of Ashuganj. In addition, Akhaura Station will be connected to Agartala.

					**-Tourism-**
	Brahmanbaria has a number of tourist attractions and sites dating back many centuries. The Kharampur Mazar Sharif is a mausoleum complex located in Akhaura which attracts hundreds of visitors. It contains the tomb of Syed Ahmad Gesudaraz, a 14th-century Islamic preacher who took part in the Conquest of Sylhet before settling in Kharampur where he was martyred. During the dewani of Shahbaz Khan in 1650, the Hatirpul was constructed. It was a bridge built over the canal mainly for elephant pass. The Mughal dewans used to communicate by the elephant in this road and also took rest near this bridge. In 1662, the Arifil Mosque was constructed by Shah Arif in Sarail. There are unknown tombs located near the mosque, supposedly the wives of Isa Khan. The 18th century Haripur Barabari was a residential palace located in Nasirnagar and many movies have been filmed there. The India-Bangladesh Border Haat located in Kasba is a weekly marketplace and allows communication with the people of the neighbouring country. Sports fans assemble at the Niaz Mohammad Stadium which was constructed in 1934.

					//\\ Criticism //\\
In 2015, Brahmanbaria faced problems of road blocks due to political agitation.[27] The situation did not last very long before being resolved. This region also faced with clashing between two groups. In 2015 a man was killed for facing problems between two groups. Former Chief Justice of Bangladesh, Surendra Kumar Sinha had said while he was delivering his speech in Brahmanbaria that smuggling was hurting the national the economy.[29] Gold and dollar are going out of the country, he said.
