                                          /// Natore District \\\


Natore is a district of Rajshahi Division located in northern Bangladesh. It borders the metropolitan city of Rajshahi, and used to be part of Rajshahi district.

Government
   Jatiyo Shôngshôd Constituencies	Natore-1, Natore-2, Natore-3, Natore-4

Area
   Total	1,900.19 km2 (733.67 sq mi)

Population (2011 census)
   Total	1,706,673
   Density	900/km2 (2,300/sq mi)
   Time zone	UTC+06:00 (BST)
   Postal code	6400
   HDI (2018)	0.606

History ->
         Natore was the District Headquarters of Rajshahi since 1769–1825. Administrative Natore subdivision was established in 1825 under Rajshahi district, on the eve of the shifting of the HQ.

During the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 a direct battle was fought between the Pakistani occupation army and the freedom fighters of Mukti Bahini on 29 March in which about 40 members of the Pakistani army including Major Aslam and Captain Ishaq were killed. On 5 May 1971 Pakistani Army killed 42 employees of North Bengal Sugar Mills (Lalpur) including the then general manager of the mill, Lieutenant Anwarul Azim; they were killed near a pond in the mill campus. The pond is now known as "Shaheed Sagar" and there is a memorial beside the pond.

Points of interest ->  
                    Tourist attractions in Natore include Rani Bhabanir Rajbari, the palace of Queen Bhabani. Rani Bhabani was a great social worker. She was the pioneer to spread education for the women of Bengal. It is a historical palace, situated in the Bongojol area nearby Natore zero (Madrasamore/old bus stand). There is a college, a school, and other institutions named after Rani Bhobani. Rani Bhabanir Rajbari is surrounded by a wonderful lake, which beautifies this area.

Chalan Beel is a large natural wetland. During the monsoon, the area of the Bil increases and touches four upazilas (sub-districts) of the Natore district. The picnic parties come to Cholon Bil every season. They cook, sing, dance, and do everything they wish in their boats. It looks like a sea, especially during the monsoon.

Uttara Gonobhaban also known as Dighapotia Rajbari is the most popular sight with visitors.[citation needed] The kings of Natore lived here. Today, it is called Uttara Gano Bhaban, and is one of the official residences of the president of Bangladesh. It is situated in large grounds, with decorative gates, a large garden, and hundreds of rooms. There is a lake surrounded proper palace area and some spectacular sculpture here. It is 3 km distance from Natore Zero point district town.Youtube video link:https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=nF43rs5k2mw

>>> Other places to visit include:
Natore Rajbari
Uttara Gonobhaban
Chalan Beel (mini Cox-bazar)
Pagla Raja's Palace (jubo park)
Patul (Halti kholabari)
Sankar gobinda Chowdhury Stadium, Natore
Maharaja's Palace
North Bengal Sugar Mills and the "Shaheed Sagar" memorial on the mill campus.

Administrative structure ->

Upazilas ->

Natore was the District HQ of Rajshahi since 1769–1825. At the eve of that replacement, Natore was declared as a Subdivision; that's why Natore is the first Subdivision of Bangladesh. Natore was established as a district in 1984.
There are seven upazilas in the district:

Gurudaspur Upazila
Natore Sadar Upazila
Baraigram Upazila
Bagatipara Upazila
Lalpur Upazila
Singra Upazila
Naldanga Upazila

Pourasavas ->

There are eight pourasavas in Natore district, 4 of them being the seat of upazilas (sub-districts). They are:
Natore
Singra
Boraigram (Baraigram Upazila)
Gurudaspur
Bagatipara (Bagatipara Upazila)
Lalpur Upazila
Naldanga (Naldanga Upazila)
Bonpara (Baraigram Upazil)

Natore town ->

The town has a population of 72615; male 51.57%, female 48.43%; density of population is 4825. Chalkbuddhnath, Station bajar, Borgasa, Alaipur, Kanaikhali, Nichabazar, Lalbazar, Madrasamor, Bongojal are the most populated areas of Natore Town.
